I started pioneering in 1978,
straight out of school.
And then after 17 years,
I had to stop because I could no longer meet
the hour requirement.
At one of the conventions, I saw
some sisters interpreting the program
into sign language.
And so I thought
that even if I couldn’t continue pioneering,
I could do something more
in Jehovah’s service
by learning sign language,
and so I started to do that.
Because I was deeply grateful to Jehovah
for all he had done for me,
I resumed pioneering again
in September 2009.
And then I had the added blessing
of now pioneering in the sign-language field.
One day I met Cecilia.
She suffers from a genetic syndrome called
Usher Syndrome, which causes deafness
coupled with tunnel vision
that can, over time, lead to blindness.
Because of that disability,
it made her extremely shy.
So it was very difficult
to communicate with her.
I started studying with her
in October 2009,
and very quickly
she started attending meetings.
I would fetch her for the meetings
and then drop her off at home afterward.
I lived about five minutes
from the Kingdom Hall,
but she was thirty minutes away.
And I quickly realized
that she would also need to put in effort
to get to the meetings
in order to make progress.
Cecilia lived close
to where she could catch a taxi
up to the train line,
and then it would be two train journeys
to get to the Kingdom Hall.
So it would take her, each way,
an hour and a half to two hours.
She also lived in a notoriously unsafe area
because of gang violence.
But I knew that Cecilia was
strong-willed enough and independent enough,
in spite of her timidity and reticence,
to be able to get herself to the meetings.
Cecilia was attending meetings regularly.
But instead of a skirt,
she wore pants to the meetings.
So I chatted to Nancy,
a sister who at the time was accompanying me
to her study most weeks,
so that we could try
and figure out a way of helping her
to make the change she needed to make.
It took about a year
of gently showing pictures
and reviewing the Bible principles,
but eventually she did get the point.
One of the weekends
that she was staying over,
I went into her room,
and on her bed, neatly laid out,
was a skirt and top
ready for the meeting.
I thanked Jehovah at that point
because, finally,
our patience had been rewarded.
We had all of our meetings on a Saturday
with a lunch break in between
when we would associate,
but we noticed that Cecilia
was isolating herself.
To reinforce for Cecilia
the principle at Acts 20:35,
a friend came up with the good idea
of helping her
to bake cookies the day before the meeting.
Cecilia shyly offered the cookies
to each person there
during the lunch break,
and it elicited such a warm response
from the brothers and sisters
and friends there.
It really drove home the point for Cecilia,
and it was beautiful to see her, after that,
come out of her shell.
In July 2014,
Cecilia gave her first student talk,
and in that month
she also started publishing.
There have been challenges, particularly
with learning sign language
but even more so
in getting to understand the deaf culture
—the way that they think—
and also financial hardships.
But the challenges and the sacrifices
were far outweighed by the blessings.
A day that’s etched in my memory
is the day that she told me
she wanted to get baptized.
Cecilia has really become
like a daughter to me,
and I’m so proud of the enormous strides
that she made in the truth.
In October 2015, she was baptized,
and I cried with joy that day.
I’ve been pioneering now for 28 years.
And over that time,
particularly since I started again
(and with Cecilia),
many, many, many brothers and sisters
in the congregation helped me.
They accompanied me to her study;
they became friends with her;
they took over when I went away.
I could never have done it on my own.
Above all,
Jehovah has helped me to cultivate qualities
like patience, self-control,
humility, compassion.
It was really wonderful to play a small part
—such a privilege—
to help Cecilia
to become part of Jehovah’s family.